.\" aria-dap(1) man page
.TH ARIA\-DAP 1 "July 2026" "Aria 0.2.5" "Aria Language"
.SH NAME
aria\-dap \- Debug Adapter Protocol server for Aria
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aria\-dap
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aria\-dap
implements the Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP), providing a bridge between
DAP\-compatible editors (such as VS Code) and LLDB for debugging compiled
Aria programs. It communicates via stdin/stdout using DAP JSON messages.
.PP
Programs must be compiled with
.B ariac \-g
to include DWARF debug info for debugging.
.SH SUPPORTED CAPABILITIES
.TP
.B configurationDoneRequest
Yes.
.TP
.B evaluateForHovers
Yes.
.TP
.B valueFormattingOptions
Yes.
.TP
.B terminateDebuggee
Yes.
.TP
.B terminateRequest
Yes.
.SH SUPPORTED COMMANDS
.SS "Lifecycle"
.B initialize\fR, \fBlaunch\fR, \fBattach\fR, \fBconfigurationDone\fR,
\fBdisconnect\fR, \fBterminate\fR.
.SS "Breakpoints"
.B setBreakpoints\fR, \fBsetExceptionBreakpoints\fR.
.SS "Execution"
.B continue\fR, \fBnext\fR (step over), \fBstepIn\fR, \fBstepOut\fR,
\fBpause\fR.
.SS "Inspection"
.B threads\fR, \fBstackTrace\fR, \fBscopes\fR, \fBvariables\fR,
\fBevaluate\fR.
.SH LAUNCH ARGUMENTS
When receiving a
.B launch
request:
.TP
.BI program " (string, required)"
Path to the compiled Aria executable.
.TP
.BI args " (string[])"
Command\-line arguments to pass to the program.
.TP
.BI cwd " (string)"
Working directory for the debuggee. Default:
.BR . .
.TP
.BI stopOnEntry " (boolean)"
Stop at entry point. Default:
.BR false .
.SH ATTACH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.BI pid " (integer, required)"
Process ID to attach to.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LLDB_DEBUGSERVER_PATH
Path to
.BR lldb\-server .
If not set, the server probes common LLVM installation paths:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B /usr/lib/llvm\-{18,19,20}/bin/lldb\-server
.IP \(bu 2
.B /usr/local/lib/llvm/bin/lldb\-server
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean exit.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error.
.SH NOTES
.B aria\-dap
has no command\-line options. It is designed to be launched by a DAP\-compatible
editor.
.PP
Requires LLDB. The binary is only built if LLDB development libraries are
found at compile time.
.PP
Process I/O is redirected to
.B /dev/null
to avoid interfering with DAP communication. Logging goes to stderr with a
.B [DAP]
prefix.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ariac (1),
.BR aria\-ls (1),
.BR aria\-pkg (1),
.BR aria\-doc (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Aria programming language is developed by the Alternative Intelligence
Collective Protocol (AICP).
