.\" aria-pkg(1) man page
.TH ARIA\-PKG 1 "July 2026" "Aria 0.2.5" "Aria Language"
.SH NAME
aria\-pkg \- Aria package manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aria\-pkg
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B aria\-pkg help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aria\-pkg
manages Aria packages. It can install packages from
.B .aria\-pkg
tarballs or source directories, remove installed packages, list and inspect
installed packages, search a package registry, pack directories into
distributable tarballs, and initialize the package directory structure.
.PP
Packages are installed to
.BR ~/.aria/packages/ .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI install " path"
Install a package from a
.B .aria\-pkg
file or a directory. Auto\-detects the source type.
.TP
.BI remove " name"
Remove an installed package (all versions).
.TP
.B list
List all installed packages with name, version, and path.
.TP
.BI info " name"
Show detailed information about an installed package including name, version,
path, binaries, and dependency status.
.TP
.BI search " [query]"
Search the package registry. Without a query, lists all packages.
.TP
.BI pack " [dir]"
Pack a directory into a
.B .aria\-pkg
tarball. Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
.B init
Initialize the
.B ~/.aria/packages/
directory structure.
.TP
.BR help ", " \-\-help ", " \-h
Show help message.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ARIA_REGISTRY
Path to
.B registry.json
file for the
.B search
command. If not set, searches fallback locations:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B aria_ecosystem/aria_package_repository/registry.json
.IP \(bu 2
.B ../aria_ecosystem/.../registry.json
.IP \(bu 2
.B ~/.aria/registry/registry.json
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (missing arguments, package not found, install/remove failure, registry
not found).
.SH EXAMPLES
Install a package from a tarball:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-pkg install mylib.aria\-pkg
.RE
.PP
Install from a source directory:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-pkg install ./mylib/
.RE
.PP
List installed packages:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-pkg list
.RE
.PP
Search for packages:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-pkg search http
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ariac (1),
.BR aria\-ls (1),
.BR aria\-doc (1),
.BR aria\-dap (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Aria programming language is developed by the Alternative Intelligence
Collective Protocol (AICP).
