.\" ariac(1) man page
.TH ARIAC 1 "July 2026" "Aria 0.2.5" "Aria Language"
.SH NAME
ariac \- compile Aria source files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ariac
.RI [ options ]
.I file.aria
.RI [ file2.aria " ...]"
.br
.B ariac \-\-version
.br
.B ariac \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ariac
is the compiler for the Aria programming language. It orchestrates the full
compilation pipeline: preprocessing (NASM\-style macros), lexical analysis,
parsing, semantic analysis (type checking, generic resolution, borrow
checking), LLVM IR generation, optimization, and linking.
.PP
It can compile one or more
.I .aria
source files into a native executable, emit intermediate representations
(LLVM IR, bitcode, assembly), or generate NVIDIA PTX code for GPU execution.
Linking is performed via
.B clang++
and requires
.BR libaria_runtime.a .
.PP
Every Aria executable must define a
.BI failsafe( int32 )
function for error\-handling accountability. Library builds
.RB ( \-c )
are exempt from this requirement.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Output Options"
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
Write output to
.IR file .
Default:
.B a.out
for executables, or derived from the input filename for other output types.
.TP
.BI \-I " dir"
Add directory to module search path (for
.B use
statements).
.TP
.B \-E
Preprocess only \(em output preprocessed source to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-llvm
Emit LLVM IR text
.RB ( .ll ).
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-llvm\-bc
Emit LLVM bitcode
.RB ( .bc ).
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-asm
Emit native assembly
.RB ( .s ).
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-deps
Emit JSON dependency manifest to stdout for
.BR aria\-make .
Outputs
.BR "{\(dqsource\(dq, \(dqimports\(dq, \(dqerror\(dq}" .
.TP
.B \-\-ast\-dump
Dump AST and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-tokens
Dump tokens and exit.
.TP
.B \-c
Compile to object file
.RB ( .o )
\(em library mode. No
.B failsafe()
required.
.TP
.B \-g
Emit DWARF debug info. Forces optimization to
.BR \-O0 .
Required for use with
.BR aria\-dap (1).
.SS "Optimization"
.TP
.BI \-O level
Optimization level:
.BR 0 ", " 1 ", " 2 ", or " 3 .
.SS "GPU Target Options"
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-ptx
Emit PTX assembly for GPU execution.
.TP
.BI \-\-target= arch
Target architecture:
.BR cpu ", " gpu ", or " gpu+cpu .
.B gpu
implies
.BR \-\-emit\-ptx .
.TP
.BI \-\-gpu\-arch= sm
CUDA compute capability. Default:
.BR sm_50 .
Examples:
.BR sm_50 ", " sm_75 ", " sm_86 ", " sm_89 ", " sm_90 .
.TP
.BI \-\-gpu\-opt= level
GPU optimization level 0\(en3. Default:
.BR 3 .
.TP
.B \-\-gpu\-debug
Embed debug info in PTX output.
.SS "Linking Options"
.TP
.BI \-l library
Link against
.IR library .
.TP
.BI \-L path
Add library search path.
.TP
.BI \-Wl, option
Pass option directly to linker.
.SS "Warning Options"
.TP
.B \-Wall
Enable all warnings.
.TP
.B \-Werror
Treat warnings as errors.
.TP
.BI \-W warning
Enable specific warning.
.TP
.BI \-Wno\- warning
Disable specific warning.
.SS "General"
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and LLVM version, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Verbose output showing compilation phases.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (compilation failure, invalid arguments, linking failure, missing input).
.SH NOTES
Multiple input files are compiled to separate LLVM modules and linked using
.BR llvm::Linker .
.PP
Modules containing 128+\-bit integer types are automatically compiled at
.B \-O0
to work around LLVM bugs.
.PP
The compiler finds stdlib modules relative to its own executable path via
.IR /proc/self/exe .
.PP
.B \-latomic
is always linked implicitly.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compile a program:
.PP
.RS
.B ariac hello.aria \-o hello
.RE
.PP
Emit LLVM IR:
.PP
.RS
.B ariac hello.aria \-\-emit\-llvm
.RE
.PP
Compile with debug info:
.PP
.RS
.B ariac \-g hello.aria \-o hello
.RE
.PP
Compile to object file (library mode):
.PP
.RS
.B ariac \-c mylib.aria
.RE
.PP
Emit PTX for GPU:
.PP
.RS
.B ariac \-\-target=gpu \-\-gpu\-arch=sm_86 kernel.aria
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR aria\-ls (1),
.BR aria\-pkg (1),
.BR aria\-doc (1),
.BR aria\-dap (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Aria programming language is developed by the Alternative Intelligence
Collective Protocol (AICP).
