.\" aria-ls(1) man page
.TH ARIA\-LS 1 "July 2026" "Aria 0.2.5" "Aria Language"
.SH NAME
aria\-ls \- Language Server Protocol server for Aria
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aria\-ls
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aria\-ls
implements the Language Server Protocol (LSP) specification, providing
real\-time IDE features for Aria source files. It communicates with editors
via JSON\-RPC 2.0 over stdin/stdout.
.PP
The server performs lexing, parsing, and AST analysis on open documents to
provide diagnostics, completions, hover information, and navigation features.
.SH LSP CAPABILITIES
.TP
.B Text Document Sync
Full document sync (kind 1).
.TP
.B Diagnostics
Real\-time error and warning reporting.
.TP
.B Hover
Type information on hover.
.TP
.B Go to Definition
Jump to symbol definition.
.TP
.B Code Completion
Code completion triggered by
.B :
and
.BR . .
.TP
.B Document Symbols
Document outline (function, struct, enum declarations).
.TP
.B Find References
Find all references to a symbol.
.TP
.B Signature Help
Parameter hints triggered by
.B (
and
.BR , .
.SH ARCHITECTURE
The server uses a multi\-threaded architecture:
.TP
.B Main thread
I/O pump that reads JSON\-RPC messages and writes responses.
.TP
.B Worker thread pool
Executes compilation and analysis tasks with priority\-based scheduling.
The pool size is based on available CPU cores.
.PP
The server supports
.B $/cancelRequest
for cancelling in\-flight operations.
.PP
State machine:
UNINITIALIZED \(-> INITIALIZED \(-> SHUTTING_DOWN \(-> EXITED.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean shutdown.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error.
.SH NOTES
.B aria\-ls
has no command\-line options. It is designed to be launched by an LSP
client such as a VS Code extension.
.PP
Diagnostic and log output goes to stderr. All LSP communication uses
stdin/stdout with
.B Content\-Length
headers.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ariac (1),
.BR aria\-pkg (1),
.BR aria\-doc (1),
.BR aria\-dap (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Aria programming language is developed by the Alternative Intelligence
Collective Protocol (AICP).
