.\" aria-doc(1) man page
.TH ARIA\-DOC 1 "July 2026" "Aria 0.2.5" "Aria Language"
.SH NAME
aria\-doc \- generate HTML documentation from Aria source files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aria\-doc
.RI [ options ]
.IR file.aria " ..."
.br
.B aria\-doc \-h
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aria\-doc
parses Aria source files and generates HTML documentation. It supports
single files, multiple files (treated as a package), directories (recursively
finds
.I .aria
files), and basic glob patterns
.RB ( *.aria ).
.PP
Output is written to an output directory as an HTML site with an
.BR index.html .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o " DIR" "\fR, \fP" \-\-output " DIR"
Output directory. Default:
.BR ./docs .
.TP
.B \-\-document\-private
Include private items in generated documentation.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output showing parsed files and progress.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help message.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (unknown option, no input files, file not found, parse failure,
generation failure).
.SH NOTES
Only
.I .aria
files are processed; non\-Aria files are silently filtered out when processing
directories.
.PP
On success, prints the absolute path to the output directory and
.BR index.html .
.SH EXAMPLES
Generate docs for a single file:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-doc mylib.aria
.RE
.PP
Generate docs for a directory with custom output:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-doc \-o api\-docs/ src/
.RE
.PP
Include private items:
.PP
.RS
.B aria\-doc \-\-document\-private src/
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ariac (1),
.BR aria\-ls (1),
.BR aria\-pkg (1),
.BR aria\-dap (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Aria programming language is developed by the Alternative Intelligence
Collective Protocol (AICP).
